Project Requirements Document: Tic-Tac-Toe Global
Version: 1.0

Tech stack - Java17 and springboot for webserver and frontend - html/css and javascript if required and compatible with java sprint boot project

Database- MySQL

Design - should be modern and smooth, use pastel colour for UI there no dark colors


Status: Drafted

1. Project Overview

A cross-platform Tic-Tac-Toe application allowing users to play against a local AI, specific friends via room codes, or random opponents globally.

2. Functional Requirements

2.1 Game Modes

Mode	Description
Vs. Computer	Single-player mode against an AI. Includes difficulty levels (Easy, Medium, Impossible).
Play with Friend	User creates a Private Room, receives a 6-digit code, and shares it.
Random Match	User joins a Public Queue. The system matches them with the first available "Waiting" player or creates a new public room.
2.2 Room & Session Management

Room Creation: Upon selecting "Play with Friend," the server generates a unique Room ID.

Joining: Users must enter a Room ID to join a private session.

Lobby State: A "Waiting for Opponent" screen is displayed until the second player joins.

Identity: Before entering any multiplayer room, users must provide a display name.

2.3 Gameplay Mechanics

Turn Management: Visual indicators for whose turn it is (e.g., "Your Turn" vs "Opponent's Turn").

Win/Draw Logic: Automatic detection of 3-in-a-row or a full board.

Score Tracking: A persistent scoreboard for the duration of the session (e.g., Player A: 2, Player B: 1).

Rematch System: Players can vote to play again without leaving the room.

3. The "Missing Pieces" (Added Features)

To make this a polished product, I've added these necessary requirements:

Turn Timer: To prevent a random player from walking away and "soft-locking" the game, each player should have 15–30 seconds to move before forfeiting.

Real-time Connection Status: Indicators to show if the opponent has disconnected or is lagging.

Auto-Cleanup: Rooms should automatically close/expire after 10 minutes of inactivity to save server resources.

Emoji Reactions: Since typing a full chat can be toxic or tedious, simple emoji reactions (👏, 😂, 😲, 😠) allow for quick interaction.

Responsiveness: The game board must scale for both mobile and desktop screens.

4. Technical Constraints

Latency: Use WebSockets (e.g., Socket.io) for real-time move updates to ensure minimal delay between international players.

Concurrency: The backend must handle multiple simultaneous rooms without "leaking" moves from Room A to Room B.

State Persistence: If a user refreshes the page, the app should ideally attempt to reconnect them to the active session via a session cookie or local storage.

5. User Interface (UI) Requirements

Home Screen: Buttons for "Solo," "With Friend," and "Quick Match."

The Board: A clean 3x3 grid.

Post-Game Modal: Large "Winner" or "Draw" text with "Rematch" or "Leave Room" options.

Leaderboard (Optional): A global top-10 list based on "Random Match" wins.

6. Success Metrics

Matchmaking Speed: Users should find a "Random Match" in under 10 seconds.

Stability: Zero "ghost moves" (moves that show for one player but not the other).


---------- database and arctiecture overview-------

Since we’re moving forward with SQL for persistence and In-Memory for the "Live" state, we have a classic hybrid architecture. Think of the SQL database as the "Long-term Memory" (Who are these players?) and the In-Memory Map as the "Short-term Memory" (Where is the 'X' right now?).

1. SQL Database Schema (PostgreSQL/MySQL)
This handles user identity and historical records. We don't want to hit this table every time someone moves a piece; we only hit it at the beginning (login/join) and the end (save result).

Table: users

Even if you don't have a full "login" system, you can use these records to track scores based on the name they entered.

id: UUID (Primary Key)

display_name: VARCHAR(50) (Unique-ish or linked to a session)

wins: INT (Default 0)

losses: INT (Default 0)

draws: INT (Default 0)

Table: match_history

This is for the "Receipts"—keeping track of every game played globally.

id: UUID (Primary Key)

player_x_name: VARCHAR(50)

player_o_name: VARCHAR(50)

winner_name: VARCHAR(50) (NULL if draw)

mode: ENUM ('friend', 'random', 'ai')

played_at: TIMESTAMP (Default NOW())

2. In-Memory Session Design (Server RAM)
In your backend code, you will maintain a Map (e.g., const rooms = new Map();). This is where the actual game logic lives.

Structure of a "Room" Object:

JavaScript
{
  id: "6-digit-code",
  status: "waiting" | "playing" | "finished",
  players: [
    { socketId: "...", name: "Alice", symbol: "X", score: 0 },
    { socketId: "...", name: "Bob", symbol: "O", score: 0 }
  ],
  board: Array(9).fill(null), // [null, 'X', 'O', ...]
  turnIndex: 0, // Whose turn is it? (0 or 1)
  lastActivity: Date.now(), // For the cleanup sweeper
  isPrivate: true // Determines if it's "Play with Friend" or "Random"
}
3. The Lifecycle: Memory to SQL
To keep your server lean, the data flows like a relay race.

Creation: When a player starts a room, it is created in the In-Memory Map.

Gameplay: Moves are validated and updated only in In-Memory.

Completion: Once a win/draw is detected:

Update the users table in SQL (increment wins/losses).

Insert a row into match_history in SQL.

Cleanup: Remove the room from In-Memory after a short grace period (e.g., 2 minutes) if no rematch is started.

4. The "Stale Room" Sweeper (Garbage Collection)
Since you asked to clear empty sessions to save memory, you need a background process. In Node.js, you’d use setInterval to run every few minutes.

The Cleanup Logic:

Case A (Disconnected): If a player’s socket disconnects, wait 30 seconds. If they don't reconnect, delete the room from the Map.

Case B (Inactive): If Date.now() - room.lastActivity > 1800000 (30 minutes), delete the room regardless of state.

Case C (Finished): If the game is over and neither player clicks "Rematch" within 2 minutes, delete the room.


